Allow constraint tuples and synonyms in typeclass instance head (under review) (#597)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: proposals/0000-allow-constraint-type-synonyms-in-deriving-heads.md

---
author: Grigorii Gerasev
date-accepted: ""
ticket-url: ""
implemented: ""
---

This proposal is [discussed at this pull request](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/597).

# Allow constraint tuples and synonyms in typeclass instances

## Motivation

Most of Haskell projects do a lot of `stock` and `anyclass` deriving
for repeating classes. Most of time there is some default list
of classes to be defined.

> Making type synonym for that seems like the obvious thing to do,
> because jet it does not work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making type synonym for that seems like the obvious thing to do,
yet it does not work.
```
(I suppose?)

There are two constructions forbidden now, but required for that usecase:

* Constraint synonyms
* Constraint tuples

Synonyms worked at some moment,
but was disabled due to wrong behaviour in some cases.
Reasoning for that is covered in Note "Instances and constraint synonyms"
and [issue 13267](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/13267).

> Main usecase only affect deriving instances head,
> but another usecase is usage of tuples/synonims in context of any instance.
> It seems to be less common, but natural to cover in same proposal
> to allow tuples/synonims anywhere in instance declaration,
> leading to more consistent semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Main usecase only affect deriving instances head,
but another usecase is usage of tuples/synonyms in context of any instance.
It seems to be less common, but natural to cover in same proposal
to allow tuples/synonyms anywhere in instance declaration,
leading to more consistent semantics.
```

Reviewer: Unless I'm misunderstanding, the secondary use-case is already possible in GHC today

```
> import GHC.Types
> type ShowEq :: Type -> Constraint; type ShowEq a = (Show a, Eq a)
> instance ShowEq a => Show (a -> b) where { show _ = "example" }
```

## Proposed Change Specification

> Proposal requires two purely syntaxic rewrites for in instance declarations
> to happen:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proposal requires two purely syntaxic rewrites for instance declarations
to happen:
```

1. Apply all type synonyms in instance declarations.

>    This should be done recrusively, until no type synonim is present anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This should be done recursively, until no type synonym is present anymore.
```

covered by examples before, so could be handled the same.

## Effect and Interactions

There is already extension named `TypeSynonymInstances`,
but it does not cover constraint synonym case.
Probably, constraint synonyms should be guarded by this extension as well
and documentation updated on that.

It may be, that some linters depend on current syntaxic restrictions,
but I am not aware on any specific cases.

## Costs and Drawbacks

Main concern is that rewriting implementations may make errors less clear.
I propose to mitigate if this happens by adding context to errors,
same as it done for instances resolving now.

## Backward Compatibility

No breakage. Part of this even was working before.

## Alternatives

For deriving instances there are two alternatives:

1. Use CPP preprocessor variable, which breaks type-safety,
   may lead to surprising error messages and is less composable
2. Use Template Haskell, which have its own problems and is less simple for beginners

For user-defined instances one may define type class instead of synonym:

```haskellb
class (ToJSON x, FromJSON x) => ToFromJSON x

instance (ToJSON x, FromJSON x) => ToFromJSON x

> ```

Reviewer: I don't think this is actually an alternative. I can't derive or define an instance of `ToFromJSON` without also (manually) deriving or defining `ToJSON` and `FromJSON` instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```haskell
class (ToJSON x, FromJSON x) => ToFromJSON x

instance (ToJSON x, FromJSON x) => ToFromJSON x
```
```

While this trick works, Haskell begginers may be not aware of it,
and it makes less clear API.

## Unresolved Questions

* Are there any other "wrong" cases not covered in existing issue?
* Which implementation approach to use?

I think all those questions are not blocking,
because they never lead to bad semantics,
only potential problems are slightly less-clear type errors.
Also implementation paths are similar any may be switched later.

## Implementation Plan

### Main approaches

The main question is how to check that constraint synonym rewriting
will lead to correct code.

> There are two principial solutions to that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two principal solutions to that:
```

   So tuples in user-defined instances head remain forbidden.

## Examples

Main usecase:

```haskell
type ToFromJSON x = (ToJSON x, FromJSON x)

-- Allowed by this proposal
derive instance ... => (ToFromJSON MyData)

-- Allowed by this proposal and working same as example above
data MyData = MkMyData deriving (ToFromJSON)

-- Should work the same with syntax allowed before proposal
derive instance ... => ToJSON MyData
derive instance ... => FromJSON MyData
```

Non-standalone instances do not have explicit params,
so rewriting implementation may be little different.
But they have just the same samantics as standalone instances with holes,
covered by examples before, so could be handled the same.

Instance context case is simpler:

```haskell
class ToFromJSON x => MyProtocolEncoding x where
   ...

data MyContainer x = ...

-- Allowed by this proposal
instance
   (MyProtocolEncoding x, ToFromJSON (MyContainer x)) =>
   MyContainer x where
   ...

-- Should work the same with syntax allowed before proposal
instance
   (MyProtocolEncoding x, ToJSON (MyContainer x), FromJSON (MyContainer x)) =>
   MyContainer x where

>    ...

Reviewer 2: `MyContainer x` is a type, not an instance, what's going on here? Did you perhaps mean to write `MyProtocolEncoding (MyContainer x)`?

Author: This example was replaced with simpler one. Thanks for your finding.

while more natural examples involve instance head as well.

## Effect and Interactions

There is already extension named `TypeSynonymInstances`,
but it does not cover constraint synonym case.
Probably, constraint synonyms should be guarded by this extension as well
and documentation updated on that.

It may be, that some linters depend on current syntaxic restrictions,
but I am not aware on any specific cases.

## Costs and Drawbacks

Main concern is that rewriting implementations may make errors less clear.
I propose to mitigate if this happens by adding context to errors,
same as it done for instances resolving now.

## Backward Compatibility

No breakage. Part of this even was working before.

## Alternatives

For deriving instances there are two alternatives:

1. Use CPP preprocessor variable, which breaks type-safety,
   may lead to surprising error messages and is less composable
2. Use Template Haskell, which have its own problems and is less simple for beginners

For user-defined instances one may define type class instead of synonym:

```haskell
class (ToJSON x, FromJSON x) => ToFromJSON x

instance (ToJSON x, FromJSON x) => ToFromJSON x

> 

Reviewer 3: The code block needs to be closed here.

Author: Thanks, solved.

---
author: Grigorii Gerasev
date-accepted: ""
ticket-url: ""
implemented: ""
---

This proposal is [discussed at this pull request](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/597).

# Allow constraint tuples and synonyms in typeclass instance head

## Motivation

Most of Haskell projects do a lot of `stock` and `anyclass` deriving
for same list of common classes. This involves a lot of code duplication.

Such usecase would be natually covered by defining type synonym
for tuple of such reused classes, but GHC does not support deriving

> not for constaint synonyms, nor for tuples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
not for constraint synonyms, nor for tuples.
```

> 

Author: Well examples are in example sections. I see it breaking the explanation as too, but I this structure was in the proposal template.

> 

Reviewer 3: The examples section is--I believe--for more in-depth examples. We can still put the parts of the examples that help the motivation into the motivation. See also e.g. https://github.com/strake/ghc-proposals/blob/acomp/proposals/0000-applicative-comprehensions.rst for one which has examples in the motivation.

> 

Author: Sorry, but I do not see, how code from examples sections can be made shorter. Without context of specific classes they may be read multiple ways, and with them they are getting "in-depth" as you say.

This may be unexpected for user, because both of this constructs

> are supported in the instance context, but not in the head.

Author: Examples of using type synonyms in instance contexts?

> are supported in the instance context, but not in the head.

Reviewer 3: Yes. You write it's supported in the context, but not in the head. Let's assume the reader of this document is uninitiated and does not know much about the intricacies and what is permitted and not today.

Another usecase is typeclasses which are semantically same as composition of
multiple classes. They too could be replaced by constraint synonym instances.

> Case of constaraint synonyms in instance head worked at some moment,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Case of constraint synonyms in instance head worked at some moment,
```

but was disabled due to wrong user-facing error messages in some cases.
Reasoning for that is covered in Note "Instances and constraint synonyms"
and [issue 13267](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/13267).

Relevant SA question (was provided by @yaitskov):

> https://stackoverflow.com/questions/28037837/deriving-clause-with-arbitrary-constraint-aliases

Author: Added small explanation. Is relevance stated clear now?

derive instance ... => (ToFromJSON MyData)

-- Should work the same with syntax allowed before proposal
derive instance ... => ToJSON MyData
derive instance ... => FromJSON MyData
```

Non-standalone instances do not have explicit params,
so rewriting implementation may be little different.
But they have just the same samantics as standalone instances with holes,
covered by examples before, so could be handled the same.

### Tuple of classes instance usecase

Example from @VitWW :

```haskell
type Num x = (Arithm x, Abs x)
type Arithm x = (Add x, Sub x, Mult x)

data MyData

instance Num MyData where
    (+) = ...
    (*) = ...

-- same as
instance Add MyData where
    (+) = ...

instance Mult MyData where
    (*) = ...
```

## Effect and Interactions

There is already extension named `TypeSynonymInstances`,
but it does not cover constraint synonym case.
Probably, constraint synonyms should be guarded by this extension as well
and documentation updated on that.

It may be, that some linters depend on current syntaxic restrictions,
but I am not aware on any specific cases.

## Costs and Drawbacks

Main concern is that rewriting implementations may make errors less clear.

> I propose to mitigate if this happens by adding context to errors,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The authors propose to mitigate this by adding context to errors, in cases where this might happen.
```

> same as it done for instances resolving now.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The same is already done for instances resolving today.
```

## Backward Compatibility

> No breakage. Part of this even was working before.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
No breakage. Part of this even used to work in the past.
```

## Alternatives

For deriving instances there are two alternatives:

> 1. Use CPP preprocessor variable, which breaks type-safety,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Use CPP, which breaks type-safety, and
```

>    may lead to surprising error messages and is less composable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   may lead to surprising error messages as well as being less composable
```

> 2. Use Template Haskell, which have its own problems and is less simple for beginners

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Use Template Haskell, which has its own set of problems and is harder to learn for beginners
```

> For user-defined instances one may define type class instead of synonym:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For user-defined instances one may define a type class instead of a synonym:
```

```haskell
class (ToJSON x, FromJSON x) => ToFromJSON x

instance (ToJSON x, FromJSON x) => ToFromJSON x
```

> While this trick works, Haskell begginers may be not aware of it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While this trick works, Haskell beginners may not be aware of it.
```

> Also it makes less clear API, because `ToFromJSON` is should be same as
> typeclass tuple only by syntaxic convention.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It also leads to a less clear API, because `ToFromJSON` should be same as a
typeclass tuple only by syntactic convention.
```

## Unresolved Questions

The only question is, which implementation approach to use.

> I think this question is not blocking,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The authors do not believe the question of implementation to be blocking,
```

> because all implementation paths lead to same semantics,
> only potential difference may be slightly less-clear type errors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
because all implementation paths lead to same semantics.
A potential difference in implementation paths could lead to slightly sub-optimal errors messages.
```

Also implementation paths are similar any may be switched later.

## Implementation Plan

### Main approaches

The main question is how to check that constraint synonym rewriting
will lead to correct code.

There are two principal solutions to that:

1. Check that rewriting will be correct before applying it.
   In this context this probably amounts to checking for each referenced
   type synonym if it belongs to some list of known bad cases.
2. Optimistically apply transformation and check for errors in later stages.

> Also we can just do both.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We could also do both.
```

Tuple of constraints implementation, on other hand, is clear.

> There is slight difference in cases of user-defined and derived instances,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is a slight difference in cases of user-defined and derived instances,
```

because in user-defined instances we need to keep track of which
method is relevant to each instance,
but overall the only thing needed is to split instances.

### Potential problems

Main potential problems with first approach
would be being unsafe or being too restrictive.

These problems, especially being too restictive,
are amplified by problem of cascading:
handling synonyms application producing jet another synonyms.
This would affect both calculation of referenced type synonyms
and possible generative effects.
In particular this leads to question if to check referenced type synonyms
once or after each reduction pass.
Another concern would be if reduction strategy affects user-facing errors.

Solution 2, on other hand cannot be unsafe or too restrictive by design.

> Also it may lead to GHC code simplification,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It may also lead to GHC code simplification,
```

because now there are multiple codepaths

> need to handle type synonims differently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
need to handle type synonyms differently.
```

The potential problem for solution 2 would be error messages clarity.
Since checks are applied to rewritten code,
they might miss original context or show non-original AST.

> I believe such problems could be solved by means of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The authors believe such problems could be solved by means of
```

tracking relation of transformed AST to original AST.

### Proposed solution

> I believe second approach is more simple to reason and implement.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The authors believe the second approach is simpler to reason and implement.
```

> I (Gregory Gerasev @uhbif19) could try to provide such implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The authors (Gregory Gerasev @uhbif19) would volunteer to provide such implementation.
```

---
author: Grigorii Gerasev
date-accepted: ""
ticket-url: ""
implemented: ""
---

This proposal is [discussed at this pull request](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/597).

# Proposal title

Allow constraints type synonyms in deriving heads again.

## Motivation

Most of Haskell projects do a lot of `stock` and `anyclass` deriving
for repeating classes. Most of time there is some default list
of classes to be defived.

Making type synonym for that seems like the obvious thing to do,
jet it does not work.

It worked at some moment for any instances,
but was disabled due to wrong behaviour in some cases:

> https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/13267

Reviewer 4: Thanks for asking a review from me.
But I'm not a part of Committee, I'm not a contributor to GHC or famous Hackage library. My thoughts are just my thoughts.

I like your proposal. I wish even more: use type synonyms in instance heads
```haskell
type ReadShow x = (Show x, Read x)

data MyData

instance ReadShow MyData where
    show a = ...
    read a = ...

-- same as 
instance (Show MyData, Read MyData) where
    show a = ...
    read a = ...
```

Seems like only phantom param case is relevant for deriving instances case.

## Proposed Change Specification

Accept type synonyms in deriving heads, by rewriting it to regular constraints.

> ## Examples
> 
> ```
> type Synonym x = (Show x, Eq x)
> 
> -- Should works exactly the same
> derive instance ... => (Synonym x)
> derive instance ... => (Show x, Eq x)

Reviewer 4: correction:
```suggestion
## Examples

```haskell
type Synonym x = (Show x, Eq x)

-- Should works exactly the same
deriving instance ... => (Synonym x)
deriving instance ... => (Show x, Eq x)
```

Author: Thanks
